---
title: 'Was the Mosaic Law Necessarily Unique?'
date: 2024-05-07
permalink: /posts/2024/05/09/Theology/
tags:
  - theology
---


The Mosaic law is the result of divine inspiration colliding with the reality of leadership. However, what would have happened if God had chosen another to lead the Israelites? Would the resultant written law have been identical? 

The differing life experiences and personality may have led to the creation of a differently expressed but potentially ontologically same law. However, some notions of inspiration would suggest that the law would have been wholly unchanged. 

If the law would have been changed in expression, then the nature of inspiration is not necessarily verbatim and verbal. There's good reason to hold this view since some authors in the NT cover the same or related topics, yet they are different along vocabulary choices and even expressed ideas. 

Alternatively, if inspiration is verbatim from God, then the entire accepted cannon should possess a cohesive rhetoric. As an example, John reports that Jesus said the work to gain heaven was to believe on the one God has sent, but Paul says that heaven can't be gained by works so that no person can boast. The reality is, two different ideas are being conveyed using almost the same language. Rhetorically, this clearly results in confusion. However, assuming authorial agency beyond authorial intent resolves this. Each author is placed in a context to learn and develop, a situation to necessitate writing, and has experienced some divine intervention. These factors effect the decisions made by the author but leave them free to act as they see fit if they retain agency.


Authorial Intent Requires Authorial Agency
------

Should Biblical authors be seen as possessing agency? If they do not possess agency, then the text must also be considered to be absent of authorial intent likewise. 


